feat(whitepapers): update pauser with temporary pause (#4855)
wormhole-foundation/wormhole: whitepapers/0003_token_bridge.md

### Pausing

The token bridge supports an emergency pause for use during an active exploit. While paused, every entry point reverts except for governance handlers and the pause-management entry points (`pause`, `freeze`, `unpause`, and the permissionless `unpauseExpired`). The pause state is a boolean `paused`; a companion `pauseExpiry` timestamp records the point at which an active pause becomes eligible to be lifted permissionlessly.

Three roles control the pause state, each configured per chain via a `SetPauserAddresses` governance message:

> - A `pauser` may call `pause` to set `paused` to `true` and set `pauseExpiry` to `block.timestamp + PAUSE_DURATION`, where `PAUSE_DURATION` is initially a hard-coded constant of 5 days. `pause` may be called repeatedly; each call pushes `pauseExpiry` to 5 days from the current time, so the bridge stays paused for as long as the `pauser` keeps re-pausing. A `pause` call MUST NOT reduce a `pauseExpiry` already further in the future (e.g. one set by `freeze`) - a lower-trust `pauser` cannot curtail a `freeze`. This requirement is why unpausing MUST reset `pauseExpiry` to `0`: a stale expiry left over from a prior `freeze` would otherwise block a later `pause`.

Reviewer: alternatively unpause could also set `pauseExpiry` to `block.timestamp` (current), that way there would be on-chain evidence of the last unpause

Author: good point, I could go for that

> - A `freeze` authority may call `freeze` to set `paused` to `true` and set `pauseExpiry` to the maximum representable timestamp, pausing the bridge for the maximum amount of time. A frozen bridge will not become permissionlessly unpausable in practice and can only be lifted by the `unpauser`. `freeze` is the higher-trust counterpart to the temporary, self-expiring `pauser`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A `freeze` role may call `freeze` to set `paused` to `true` and set `pauseExpiry` to the maximum representable timestamp, pausing the bridge for the maximum amount of time. A frozen bridge will not become permissionlessly unpausable in practice and can only be lifted by the `unpauser`. `freeze` is the higher-trust counterpart to the temporary, self-expiring `pauser`. A `freeze` call from the `freeze` role always succeeds: if the bridge is unpaused, `freeze` causes a pause; if paused, a `freeze` effectively extends an existing `pause` to the maximum duration. Successive calls to `freeze()` are a no-op.
```

- `authority` reads as a little Solana-specific and overloads conceptually with a token mint's freeze authority
- makes explicit how freeze works as an override for any existing paused state

- An `unpauser` may call `unpause` to set `paused` back to `false` and `pauseExpiry` to `0` at any time, regardless of `pauseExpiry`. This is the privileged path to lift a pause (including a `freeze`) before it would otherwise expire.

> Additionally, a permissionless `unpauseExpired` entry point allows anyone to set `paused` to `false` once `block.timestamp >= pauseExpiry`. This bounds a `pauser`-initiated pause to `PAUSE_DURATION` without requiring the `unpauser` to act, while ensuring the pause never lapses prematurely: the boolean `paused` remains authoritative for every other entry point's check, so a pause is only lifted by an explicit `unpause` or `unpauseExpired` call - never silently by the passage of time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, a permissionless `unpauseExpired` entry point allows anyone to set `paused` to `false` once `block.timestamp >= pauseExpiry`. This bounds a `pauser`-initiated pause to `PAUSE_DURATION` without requiring the `unpauser` to act, while ensuring the pause never lapses prematurely: the boolean `paused` remains authoritative, so a pause is only lifted by an explicit `unpause` or `unpauseExpired` call - never silently by the passage of time.
```

nit: Not _every_ other entrypoint, just the non-governance, non-pause ones.

> Additionally, a permissionless `unpauseExpired` entry point allows anyone to set `paused` to `false` once `block.timestamp >= pauseExpiry`. This bounds a `pauser`-initiated pause to `PAUSE_DURATION` without requiring the `unpauser` to act, while ensuring the pause never lapses prematurely: the boolean `paused` remains authoritative for every other entry point's check, so a pause is only lifted by an explicit `unpause` or `unpauseExpired` call - never silently by the passage of time.

Reviewer: I'm curious why require this explicit step and not just do it implicitly when the pause time expires?

Reviewer: I see this is explained below. I'm not sure the overhead is significant (no extra storage slot reads if we structure things right), but I guess it's fine

Author: because the explicit step allows an event to be emitted, which seems preferable.

The roles are kept separate to allow for asymmetric authority between the assigned addresses - for example, a 2/3 multisig empowered to `pause` for short windows, a higher-threshold key empowered to `freeze`, and Wormhole governance retained for `unpause`. These SHOULD be effectively different roles, but this is intentionally not enforced on-chain or in the Guardian VAA generation process.

> Any role may be left unset. A zero-length value or an all-zero address (of the target chain's native address size) is treated as the role being unassigned. When a role is unassigned, the corresponding entry point MUST revert before comparing the caller against the configured role. Implementations MUST NOT treat an all-zero address as an authorized caller. This allows governance to disable `pause`, `freeze`, or `unpause` without removing the entry point - for example, leaving `pauser` unassigned on chains where pause authority is not yet desired, or zeroing a key suspected of compromise without first provisioning its replacement. The permissionless `unpauseExpired` entry point has no associated role and is always callable. If `unpauser` is unassigned while the bridge is paused, recovery before `pauseExpiry` requires Wormhole governance to first assign a non-zero `unpauser` via `SetPauserAddresses`; otherwise the pause lifts permissionlessly once `pauseExpiry` has passed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any role may be left unset. A zero-length value or an all-zero address (of the target chain's native address size) is treated as the role being unassigned. When a role is unassigned, the corresponding entry point MUST revert before comparing the caller against the configured role. Implementations MUST NOT treat an all-zero address as an authorized caller. This allows governance to disable `pause`, `freeze`, or `unpause` without removing the entry point - for example, leaving `pauser` unassigned on chains where pause authority is not yet desired, or zeroing a key suspected of compromise without first provisioning its replacement. The permissionless `unpauseExpired` entry point has no associated role and is always callable. If `unpauser` is unassigned while the bridge is paused, recovery before `pauseExpiry` requires Wormhole governance to first assign a non-zero `unpauser` via `SetPauserAddresses`; otherwise the pause can be permissionlessly lifted once `pauseExpiry` has passed.
```

nit: More explicit that a call to unpause/unpauseExpired is required; it doesn't lift on its own

`submitRecoverChainId(Message recoverChainId)` - Execute a `RecoverChainId` governance message. Only callable on a forked chain (EVM-only).

> `pause()` - Set `paused` to `true` and `pauseExpiry` to `block.timestamp + PAUSE_DURATION` (5 days), never reducing a `pauseExpiry` already further in the future. Callable only by the `pauser`; reverts when `pauser` is unassigned.

Reviewer 2: You could mention that freeze, unpause, and unpauseExpired are idempotent, but pause is not. The main benefit would be guiding reviews and test generation, so it may not be necessary long-term.

> `freeze()` - Set `paused` to `true` and `pauseExpiry` to the maximum representable timestamp. Callable only by the `freeze` authority; reverts when `freeze` is unassigned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`freeze()` - Set `paused` to `true` and `pauseExpiry` to the maximum representable timestamp. Callable only by the `freeze` role; reverts when `freeze` is unassigned.
```
Reads as a little Solana-specific and overloads conceptually with a token mint's freeze authority

`unpause()` - Set `paused` to `false` and `pauseExpiry` to `block.timestamp`. Callable only by the `unpauser`; reverts when `unpauser` is unassigned.

> `unpauseExpired()` - Set `paused` to `false` and `pauseExpiry` to `block.timestamp`. Permissionless; reverts unless `block.timestamp >= pauseExpiry`.

Reviewer 3: Should we add "reverts when `paused != true`" ?
It can be called when the bridge was never paused and emitting misleading events

Reviewer 2: ➕ Yeah it would be annoying if someone overwrote the timestamp.

// address of the native size is equivalent to a zero length and is
// also treated as unassigned.
PauserLen uint8
// Address authorized to temporarily pause the bridge (for PAUSE_DURATION)
Pauser [PauserLen]uint8
// Length of the freeze address. Must equal the target chain's native
// address size, or 0 to leave the role unassigned. An all-zero address
// of the native size is also treated as unassigned.
FreezeLen uint8
// Address authorized to pause the bridge for the maximum duration

> Freeze [FreezeLen]uint8

Reviewer 2: nit: Freezer instead? I like either pause/freeze/unpause or pauser/freezer/unpauser but mixing them feels off

Author: 🥶

Rather than a single boolean `paused` state, the bridge could expose finer-grained pauses (e.g. inbound vs. outbound) so that, for example, redemptions can continue while new deposits are blocked. We are not taking this approach now in favor of a simple boolean; granular pause can be added later without breaking the pause/unpause governance defined here.

> ### Pause state as a pure timestamp

Reviewer 2: We could add a section here for "Unpausing is always permissioned" to explain why we have the permissionless `unpauseExpired`, if you like.

Author: perhaps this comment will be enough to say because this approach was recommended instead 😬 I'm not sure I have additional color to add aside from there's a permissionless unpause because some thought it best to have a permissionless unpause (and a separate `freeze` authority to less temporarily pause)
